Types of Teeth
Incisors
Characteristics:** Incisors are the front teeth, typically four on the top and four on the bottom.
They have sharp, thin edges that are ideal for cutting.
Their flat surface helps in slicing through food.
Function:** The primary role of incisors is to cut food into manageable pieces, making it easier to chew and swallow.
They are often used for biting into crunchy foods like apples.
Canines
Characteristics:** Canines are located next to the incisors and are pointed with long, strong roots that anchor them in place.
There are two canines in the upper jaw and two in the lower jaw.
Their shape allows them to exert considerable pressure.
Function:** The main function of canines is to tear food, especially meat.
Their pointed design makes them effective for gripping and ripping, which is particularly useful for carnivorous diets.
Premolars
Characteristics:** Premolars, also known as bicuspids, are situated behind the canines.
They have a broader surface with two or more cusps (points) that aid in processing food.
Typically, there are two premolars on each side of the mouth, both upper and lower.
Function:** The function of premolars includes grasping, tearing, and chewing food.
They play a crucial role in breaking down food into smaller particles, facilitating further digestion.
Molars
Characteristics:** Molars are larger, flatter teeth located at the back of the mouth,
with a wide crown and multiple cusps that provide a large surface area.
Usually, there are three molars on each side of the upper and lower jaws, including wisdom teeth for some individuals.
Function:** Molars are designed primarily for grinding food.
Their strong structure allows them to crush and grind tough and fibrous food
items, such as grains and vegetables, into smaller pieces suitable for swallowing and
digestion.